---
hide:
    - toc
---
#

### BioSensing

The nervous system, specifically the autonomous nervous system (Porges, X), acts as a sensor that instructs our body and mind how we should react to all of life's stimuli. Whether it is spending time with someone, working on a job, eating a type of food, staring into the horizon through the ocean, or having a bear attack you, the nervous system plays a key role in processing information and genearting visceral instructions for survival. The ANS consists of two main branches, the sympatehtic nervous system (SNS) and the parasypathetic nervous system (PNS). Our SNS activates when confronting situations of fight or flight, and stimuli that implies stress, fear or danger. This is often positive when interacting in sports or activities of sharp focus, yet could be problematic if we are attempting to live mindfully, engage in positive habits, or to interact with life through love and wellness. Our PNS activates when we manage to engage in activites that allow us to rest, digest and socialize. A prolonged activation of this state can result in a burst of creative energy and a state of flow, allowing us to tap into our complete potential. Our PSN is highly sensible, and needs activation in order to thrive. Spending extended periods of time without our PNS active, that is a prolonged activation of SNS, could result in a state of hyperarousal that implies collapse, immobility and a state of conservation of energy in terms of nervous balance. This is often the state for patients that deal with depression or shut down. It is important to understand that nervous balance is not linear, and there are multiple domains in which it can be measured and interpreted. For instance, trauma and past conditioning can affect our nervous balance in the long term. While the foods we eat, our daily habits and choices can affect our nervous balance in the short term. Eventually, habits can become engrained in our long term balance, where disease or other unfavorable situations can arise.


This is all to state that our ANS plays a critical role in our relationship with existence. Nervous system balance represents one of the most fundamental aspects for wellbeing, and yet it has been completely overlooked. Why is this? [understand!] So, I've decided to embark on a journey to explore ways of relating with our nervous system in ways that can be insightful, attractive and transformative. I intend to create different prototypes for biofeedback devices that can be used to train nervous balance, and to access tools and knowledge for wellbeing and mindful living.

As a starting point, we've created two digital sculptures that are designed to spark curiosity around nervous system balance and of the tools that can enhance wellness through NS stimulation techniques. We had an event and invited people over to interact with the prototypes and learn from their experience. It was an exciting experience and enabled great feedback and learning for possible directions of evolution. We would like to polish and continue exploring the potential behind art as biofeedback technology, and perfect the experience through self-start and other personalized configurations.

Next, we would like to develop an app that allows users to connect with different fitness trackers and create real-time data sculptures on their phone or smart watch. This would allow for more scale and deeper interaction with users in terms of regenerative education and promotion of nervous system balance. We believe that pursuing a vision where humanity prioritizes nervous balance can be revolutionary and transformative for the world. Join us for the ride!
