---
hide:
    - toc
    - <h1>
---
#
## Making Sense


### How can design reconfigure systems of extraction? Which worlds can we design with the power of todays tools? How can we design the transition towards these worlds?

Sadly, perhaps the possible realities for the futures are not bright. Our current systems have created a complex web of forces which have been used to expand the power and influence of certain groups at the expense of others. Moreover, as automation takes over the world, there are raising concerns over the importance of critical thinking and conscious decision-making. If we do not address grand challenges like climate change, global inequality, and the threat of artificial intelligence responsibly and transparently, our future is at great risk. But what if we could transform individuals and empower people to create and demand regenerative products, services, spaces, and systems that support the health and wellbeing of people and the planet? This is where education, circular design and regenerative design come into play. By transforming and empowering individuals, designers can reconfigure systems of extraction towards new worlds of liberty, collectivism, and fulfillment.

Across the evolution of humanity, systems have been designed to extract resources, time, attention, and anything that could be transformed into profits, creating a complex web of economic, military, and cultural forces. These systems have been used to expand the power and influence of certain groups at the expense of others. The harsh reality is that Capitalism and its systems of extraction are not just about exploiting people, but also about exploiting the environment. As described by Patel and Moore in their book "The History of the World in 7 Cheap Things," the cheapening of nature, work, food, energy, money, care, and lives have enabled the accumulation of wealth and power by a small group of elites. Extraction is not just an issue between societies but is also an issue that can also occur within them. The futures presented today are dictated by these characteristics, and there exists great risk in navigating scenarios where grand challenges like climate change, global inequality and the threat of artificial intelligence are not addressed responsibly and transparently because of these systems.

Moreover, looking at the degree of perceived takeover of automation in the futures and all emerging AI powered applications, it becomes of even greater importance to transform individuals and empower the people making the decisions behind these automated futures. Critical thinking and conscious decision making are key qualities for tomorrow. The advancement of technology has enabled systems of extraction to exist with greater power. Today, open tools are available to collect, digest, and visualize data in ways that suggest detailed and accurate patterns of behavior. This power to manipulate behavior, and how easy we give out all of our data is often overlooked. We have little to no privacy in terms of our data, how our behavior is analyzed for the advantage of large institutions. Designers, and humans in general, must prioritize the implications of navigating futures where grand challenges like climate change, global inequality, and the threat of artificial intelligence are not addressed seriously and consciously. Not only this, I consider the futures at great risk if great individual transformation at a collective level is not attained. We must be willing and able to question the status quo and challenge unsustainable and harmful established power structures. We must all passionately dream of enjoying calmer, more fulfilling and harmonious lives. By transforming individuals and empowering people who make decisions that create realities, designers can reconfigure systems of extraction towards new worlds of liberty, collectivism, and regeneration. We can design and transition towards alternative economic systems that promote wellbeing, are based con cooperation, rather than competition, and prioritize the common of all human and non-human life. A world where we create and demand simple pleasure, peace, and joy for all. I’m not suggesting going back to living free in nature, but rather reevaluate what is really happening in the world and take a step back to reframe evolution and our desired direction.  

To transform a system based on individuality, individual transformation must occur first. Awakening ~ or, regenerative education that is. As a precursor, designers need to explore and propose ways in which individual transformation can occur. That is, allowing people to heal and become empowered to create and demand regenerative products, services, spaces, and systems that support health and wellbeing of people and the planet. This transformation could allow a transition towards a new world where individuals prioritize regenerative practices and economic systems are designed to benefit the common good of all life. This transformation suggests the spark of new food systems that are healthy and accessible, new work dynamics that promote purpose and safety, more fulfilling and joyful days with quality time, relationships and love, and the acceptance of existence with gratitude. Designers can develop products and services that educate and inspire individuals to prioritize wellbeing and embrace regenerative practices, empowering them to demand sustainable solutions for a healthy and thriving world. As an example, I am developing education technology that can help people make better decisions to optimize their wellbeing by educating on Heart Rate Variability (HRV). HRV is a simple and practical way to connect with our nervous system, which is directly linked to our mental and physical health performance. By understanding our nervous states, we can explore ways to improve our wellbeing through sleep, holistic therapy, exercise, or nutrition, among many other techniques. By unlocking the power of this body of knowledge, we open the door to healing, regenerating, and thriving. HRV is a powerful seed of knowledge that can unlock curiosity towards understanding the dimensions of what it means to feel well. If we come to understand what our body is expressing and learn of ways in which we can better support its needs, then we can enjoy more time of feeling well and energized to engage with life.  

Another important aspect to consider as we come to propose new worlds as suggested is Circular Design. This approach aims to eliminate waste and pollution by keeping materials and products in use for as long as possible. In a fully realized circular economy, materials are continuously reused, and waste is minimized, resulting in a closed-loop system with minimal environmental impact. Innovations in technology and materials science could lead to more efficient resource use and new circular business models, such as product-as-a-service or shared ownership. Circular design could also become more integrated into mainstream design practices, with designers prioritizing resource efficiency and circularity as a key aspect of their work. Additionally, circular design could drive a shift in consumer behavior towards more sustainable choices, leading to a more conscious and responsible consumer culture. As an example, I come to imagine the potential behind the industrialization of bioplastics and of the closed loop systems in can promote within food systems. I also imagine what other ways we can generate value from what can be considered trash. As witnessed from a first person, great things can often be found in the dumpster. There obviously needs to be a change in consciousness about how we consume, and designers need to promote concepts that inspire mindful consumption. Another example of circularity is Biciclot, a garage in Poble Nou, Barcelona, which hosts a space for a community of cyclists for maintenance, repairs, and repurposing broken bikes to give them new life.  This fantastic concept does not only promote a healthy and clean commuting activity, but also fosters a circular system for bikes parts and components.  

Regenerative design is another approach that could prove valuable in our transition towards safer, joyful, and meaningful systems of coexistence. Designing for regeneration is to design products, systems, spaces and buildings that not only minimize negative impacts, but actively work to restore and improve the natural systems they depend on. It is an holistic approach to design that goes beyond the traditional sustainability approach of reducing harm and focuses on creating positive impact and regenerating environments. Designers can create buildings that generate their own energy, urban agriculture systems that provide food and green spaces for communities, and transportation systems that prioritize walking, biking, and public transit over private vehicles. Regenerative design can also foster healthier behavior for people by creating environments that support physical activity, social connection, and access to nature. This last aspect is by default a double agent regenerative; that means that designing for access to nature implies vitality and regeneration for both human and nature. By designing spaces that prioritize active transportation like walking and biking, designers can encourage people to engage in more physical activity and reduce their dependence on cars. Urban agriculture systems can also provide opportunities for people to connect with nature, access fresh produce, and engage in community building activities. Again, these activities are both beneficial and revitalizing for both human and non-human life. Furthermore, designing buildings that prioritize natural light and ventilation can improve indoor air quality and promote mental and physical wellbeing. By incorporating regenerative design principles, designers can create environments that support the health and wellbeing of both people and the planet.

Fortunately, there is hope for a brighter future. While our current systems may seem daunting and complex, we have the power to transform and shift towards regenerative practices that prioritize the health and wellbeing of people and the planet. Through education and circular and regenerative design, we can empower individuals to demand and create products, services, and spaces that support a sustainable future. By reconfiguring systems towards a more collective and fulfilling approach, we can tackle grand challenges such as climate change, global inequality and the ego-driven mindset in a responsible and transparent way. We have the power to create a world that values both people and the planet. With our collective critical thinking and conscious decision-making, we can pave the way towards a vibrant and sustainable future.
